📊 Quarter One Report – Executive Data Summary
🧾 Project Description
This project is part of an Excel-based case study simulating real-world business analysis. The goal was to prepare a professional, executive-level data summary and product performance analysis for Adventure Works' Q1 sales in 2022 and 2023. It included formatting, formula creation, data transformation, and PivotTable reporting.

✅ Features & Techniques Used
1. Data Formatting & Presentation
Adjusted column widths to accommodate data.

Added executive summary headings: TOTAL Q1 SALES and Q1 MONTHLY TOTALS.

Applied professional formatting:

Increased font size.

Bold text and wrapped headings.

Background color for headers.

Used Merge & Center for section headers.

Utilized Format Painter to maintain consistent styles.

2. Data Cleaning & Organization
Used the PROPER() function to clean product names.

Replaced formulas with static values via Paste Values.

Sorted data by Order Date using Sort Dialog (Oldest to Newest).

Hid unnecessary columns (F, S–Y).

Used Freeze Panes to lock header rows and key columns for easier viewing.

3. Formula-Based Calculations
Extracted Month and Year from Order Date using:

MONTH() and YEAR() functions.

Calculated Order Total with:

=Retail Price * Order Quantity

Applied conditional logic using:

IF() function to determine Tax Due (5% tax if total > 2000, else 0).

Used SUMIF() for:

Calculating total Q1 sales for 2022 and 2023.

Calculating monthly Q1 totals (Jan, Feb, Mar) for both years.

Created Percentage Difference formulas for:

Year-over-year sales increase:
=(2023 Sales - 2022 Sales) / 2022 Sales

Month-wise % differences.

4. Table Creation
Transformed raw data into an Excel Table:

Used Insert > Table with $F$1:$Y$246 range.

Renamed the table to Sales_details.

Customized Table Design and Style for better readability.

5. PivotTable Reporting
Created PivotTable from Sales_details:

Added Product Name to Rows.

Added Order Total to Values twice:

First as Sales Total (formatted as currency).

Second as % of Total (using “% of Grand Total”).

Switched layout to Tabular Form.

Added Slicers for:

Product Category

Year

Customized slicers for improved interactivity.

Renamed worksheet to Product Analysis and positioned it next to the Summary worksheet.

📌 Final Deliverables
Summary Worksheet: Executive overview of Q1 sales for 2022 and 2023.

Product Analysis Worksheet: Interactive PivotTable to assess product/category performance.

Well-formatted, professional workbook ready for management presentation.

📁 Tools & Skills Used
Microsoft Excel 365

Data Cleaning

Conditional Formatting

Date Functions: MONTH(), YEAR()

Text Function: PROPER()

Logical Functions: IF()

Math Functions: SUMIF(), Percentage Change

Tables & Table Design

PivotTables and Field Settings

Insert Slicers for interactive filtering

Sorting, Freezing Panes, Hiding Columns

🚀 Outcome
A clean, clear, and executive-ready Excel report combining raw data, calculated metrics, and interactive analytics. This project showcases applied Excel proficiency suitable for business analytics, sales tracking, and data storytelling.